Parliament, Sunday, 12 March 2023 - South Africa has proposed an amendment to the draft resolution submitted by various countries belonging to the IPU, to the Standing Committee on Peace and International Security on cyber-attacks and cyber-crimes as new risks to global security.
	
	Member of Parliament, Ms Fikile Masiko, made this proposal during the 35th session of the Forum of Women parliamentarians that discussed, amongst other topics, the Cyber-attacks and Cyber-crimes: The new risks to the global security from a gender perspective.
	
	The amendment to this resolution was influenced by the research conducted by the United Nations Women which found that some states do not criminalise the non-consensual online dissemination of intimate or sexually explicit images. This is why the South African parliamentarians propose an amendment that seeks to ensure that women and the girl child are not shamed and humiliated by online violence.
	
	Ms Masiko proposed that paragraph six of the resolution should be amended to read as follows:
	(6) Encourage parliaments to make full use of their oversight function to ensure that governments have the tools including comprehensive support to victims in the form of technological support for digital content deletion to control the rapid increase in cybercrime and cyberattacks and to protect the digital security, identity, privacy and data of citizens, especially the most vulnerable. 
	Meanwhile, Dr Annelie Lotriet who also participated in the 35th session of the Forum of Women parliamentarians on the panel discussion on Parliamentary leadership addressing insecurity and crises: Putting gender equality at the centre of water security, climate resilience and peace sustainability, said more women are needed in key institutions such as parliaments and the Executive to build more inclusive and equitable societies.
	
	Dr Lotriet also lamented the lack of legal protection in countries which continue to enable everything from gender-based violence to discrimination. She emphasized the imperative role that should be played by parliamentarians in ensuring that a comprehensive domestic legislative framework is accompanied by appropriate resources and awareness programmes, to not only end impunity but to send a strong message that violence against women is not acceptable.
	
	She informed the forum of how South Africa is committed to ridding its society of gender-based violence and femicide that remain pervasive violations in the country. Dr. Lotriet also detailed how the role played by South Africa has strengthen its legislative framework to better protect victims in violent relationships; broadened the categories of sex offenders whose names must be included in the National Register for Sex Offenders and has tightened bail and sentencing conditions in cases that involve gender-based violence.
	
	The Forum of Women parliamentarians was the last of the IPU structures that had their preparatory meetings to sharpen their inputs to the draft resolutions. These resolutions are scheduled to be presented to the IPU General Assembly for adoption before the end of the week-long conference of the world’s 179 Parliaments.
	
	The Assembly was officially opened by the Bahrain Prime Minister, Prince Salman Bin Hamad, on behalf of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa at the Exhibition World Bahrain in Manama. The Assembly is one of the most attended gatherings of the IPU with over 1700 delegates and 63 Speakers or Heads of parliaments.
	
	Those wishing to do interviews with the leader of the South African Parliamentary delegation and other Members of Parliament are welcome to contact Mr Manelisi Wolela through WhatsApp and email: +27760622180 / mwolela@parliament.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	ENQUIRIES: Moloto Mothapo The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng