Parliament, Thursday, 9 March 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Police is gravely concerned by the acute shortage of trainers that should be playing a critical role in preparing the new recruits to effectively fight crime. The committee yesterday received a report on the recruitment process followed to enlist new recruits as well as status update on the 2023/24 intake. The committee reiterated its appreciation to the President for the decision to increase boots on the ground, a necessary intervention to decrease the police to people ratio which was on the rise. Furthermore, the committee said to ensure effectiveness of the police, there must be concerted efforts for the availability of theskilled police trainers. The committee said it is concerning that there is a combined deficit of 358 trainers at all training colleges across the country. “Training plays a critical role in the life of a police officer and the deficit will compromise the quality of training necessary to produce quality recruits that will hit the ground running in the fight against crime,” said Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee has also raised concern about the perceived nepotism and corruption in the recruitment system and has called on the South African Police Service (SAPS) management to tighten processes and work towards eliminating the manual application system to improve monitoring. Despite this, the committee has called for the SAPS management to conclude the investigation into allegations of corruption and to bring to book those that are responsible. Also, the committee has called on the SAPS to approach the National Treasury and the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI) regarding the state of SAPS’s infrastructure in general to ascertain if SAPS cannot take over functions delegated to DPWI. This is to ensure that maintenance of these properties receives urgent attention to arrest dilapidation. The committee will consider visiting these training colleges to assess the living conditions of the recruits. Despite this, the committee will await a progress report on the completion of the recruitment process. Meanwhile, the committee welcomed the contributions made by police unions, the South African Police Union and the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union andstakeholder Independent Policing Union of South Africaon the item which was discussed yesterday. The committee remains of the view that cooperation and collaborative action are necessary and reliable pillars in the fight against crime, hence there is a need to include all stakeholders in addressing challenges. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committees’ Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo