Parliament, Saturday, 4 March 2023 – The residents who came from different wards of the Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality supported the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B13-2021] during public hearings on the Bill that took place yesterday in East London’s Town Hall.
	
	The participants urged the committee to ensure that its role is not limited to the promotion of public participation on the Bill, but it goes to a point of ensuring that the historically marginalised South Africans participate in reaping the benefits of the open access to petroleum and gas resources in their area.
	
	The participants were people who were drawn from most of the wards of the Buffalo City Metropolitan Municipality. They included individuals, ward representatives, community based organisations, representatives of the people with disabilities and business organisations such as the National Federated Chamber of Commerce.
	
	In supporting the Bill they said inasmuch-as the Bill promises hope for the creation of economic and employment opportunities as one of its pros, it also carries life threatening cons that must be exposed so that they are averted before the Bill becomes a law. Among those cons they said is the pollution of the environment by the drilling of mines, toxicity and hazardousness underneath the soil and the domination of the new petroleum and gas industry by foreigners.
	
	There were participants who urged the committee that the government must ensure that Occupational Health and Safety Act, and Skills Development Act are tightened to ensure highest levels of safety of mine workers and that they are appropriately skilled. They said the history of the death of Africans in the mines and exploitation evoke mixed feelings about the mining industry.
	
	There were also few participants who opposed the Bill. They called for the custodianship of the state to all the natural resources underneath the soil. They said a stipulation that the state will control 20% of the petroleum and gas resources is unacceptable, and it is a perpetuation of the imbalances of the past. They called for the state to control 50%. They said the government must strengthen the existing Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act.
	
	The participants who supported the Bill also cautioned the committee that there is something on the Bill which emphasises that the petroleum and gas material from their area is not going to be taken away to foreign countries as raw material and come back to South Africa as finished products that are going to be sold in high prices. They called for processing of the raw petroleum material internally.
	
	The committee appreciated the contributions of the participants on the Bill and told them that all their inputs are going to be considered when it deliberates on the Bill. The committee will conduct public hearings on the Bill in the Sarah Baartman District in Jansenville today. It invites all interested people to participate by expressing their views on the Bill.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPHO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo