Parliament, Thursday, 9 March 2023 – The Auditor-General of South Africa (AG) briefed the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans on material irregularities processes at the Department of Defence (DOD) and the status of records review. The briefing to the committee was attended by the Minister and Deputy Minister of Defence, who informed the committee that the Director-General in the Department of Military Veterans has been suspended.
	
	The Office of the AG reiterated that it has consistently advised that the Minister of Defence, as the executive authority, along with the Secretary of Defence, as the accounting authority, and the Chief of Defence must work together to set a consistent leadership tone about what is acceptable.
	
	The AG said as part of DOD operations, members of the force are sometimes delegated functions and responsibilities related to financial management. However, this practice sometimes leads to a lack of internal controls and financial management transgressions on the part of members of the force.
	
	The committee was concerned to note that the DOD has 73 procurement units, some of them dealing with high-risk procurements.
	
	The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, Mr Cyril Xaba, said: “The supply chain process was an area where a majority of the audit queries came from and it was always the same area that had minimal progress in dealing with audit queries.
	
	He added that the committee has long expressed its concern that supply chain management is not located under the chief financial officer, in complete violation of Treasury regulations, which potentially worsens the situation. The committee remains concerned that the chief audit executive position at DOD remains vacant and there seems to be no urgency to fill the position.
	
	The committee welcomed the AG’s findings relating to the duality of authority within the DOD, causing uncertainty about who has the responsibility to instil discipline and ensure swift and effective consequence management for financial management transgressions.
	
	The committee welcomed the Minister’s decision to instruct senior management of both the department and the defence force to expedite all cases in which personnel are on extended suspension on full salary, or lift the suspension.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS, MR CYRIL XABA
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Jabulani Majozi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 083 358 5224
	E-mail: jamajozi@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng