Parliament, Wednesday, 1 March 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will from 2–5 March 2023 conduct public hearings on the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development (UPRD) Bill [B13-2021] in the Nelson Mandela Bay and Buffalo City Metropolitan municipalities and in the OR Tambo and Sarah Baartman District municipalities in the Eastern Cape.
	
	The hearings will start on Thursday, 2 March, at Port St Johns Local Municipality’s Town Hall. They will then move to Buffalo City Metropolitan’s East London Town Hall on Friday, 3 March, and to the Beyers Naude Local Municipality’s Jansenville Town Hall in the Sarah Baartman District. The committee will conclude the Eastern Cape leg of the public hearings on the Bill on Sunday, 5 March, in the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality at Motherwell’s Well Estate Multipurpose Centre.
	
	The Bill seeks to separate petroleum provision from mineral provision, as currently provided for in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (Act No. 28 of 2002). The separation is aimed at providing two independent pieces of legislation to address matters pertinent to each industry and to bring about stability and security to investors, especially in the upstream petroleum sector.
	
	Furthermore, the Bill enhances state participation in the upstream petroleum industry and economic transformation of the industry. It includes provisions that promote petroleum resources development in a sustainable and equitable manner for the benefit of all South Africans.
	
	The committee invites the people and organisations with interest in the Bill to go to their closest venue to express their views on the Bill. All the hearings are from 10:00–14:00 at all the venues.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal