Parliament, Monday, 13 March 2023 – Residents urged the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education to ensure effective implementation of the Basic Education Laws Amendment (BELA) Bill so that the objectives of the Bill are realised. The committee concluded three successful public hearings on the Bill in the North West Province over the weekend.
	
	Some of the participants in the public hearings emphasised that poor implementation will undermine the Bill’s objectives and delay its transformational intentions, which seek to ensure standardisation within the sector. They also said that South Africa should give more attention to implementing progressive legislation, such as the BELA Bill, which aim to advance the lives of previously marginalised people.
	
	Participants in the hearings supported the Bill’s potential to remove barriers to entry to what are colloquially called Model C schools, which they said use language and admission policies to exclude learners. They also supported the idea that change within the Basic Education system is necessary, something they believe the Bill will ensure.
	
	However, others opposed the Bill on the basis that it threatens mother-tongue education by centralising power in the office of the head of department. This move would undermine the cooperative relationship that should exist between the department and school governing bodies (SGBs), they said. SGBs should retain the power to determine language and admission policies, participants in the hearings believe, as these bodies have a better understanding of what is necessary to achieve effective learning within the specific school’s capacity and environment.
	
	Participants in the hearing in Vryburg united in their opposition to clause 14 of the Bill, which proposes that SGB members must disclose their financial interests every year. Some of them were concerned that the clause is inconsistent with the provisions of the Protection of Personal Information Act and would be an invasion of privacy, particularly because SGB members act on a voluntary basis, for the benefit of learners, rather than to promote their business interests.
	
	Participants were also mostly against the clause governing the possession, consumption or selling of liquor on school premises, especially in light of the message these actions would send to learners in a country struggling to address substance abuse. Other opportunities exist for schools to raise funds that do not include alcohol.
	
	Having concluded the hearings in North West, the committee will this week move to Mpumalanga to seek further views on the Bill from the people of that province. The committee has now concluded hearings in three provinces – Limpopo, Free State and North West. In line with the committee’s intention to enable broader access to its work and to enable as extensive a consultation process as possible, the committee will continue to hold its public hearings in the afternoons and on weekends. The public hearings are open to every individual and organisation wishing to make their submission.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Economic Freedom Fighters