Parliament, Saturday, 11 March 2023 –The residents of greater Bojanala Platinum District Municipality have underscored the importance of the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill in enhancing accountability in the financial affairs of schools thereby ensuring that the little that is there serves its intended purpose. These views were shared by the residents with the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education during the first leg of three public hearings on the Bill in the North West.
	
	The public hearings are held in line with Section 59 (1) of the Constitution, which obligates Parliament to ensure public involvement in the legislative-making process of the National Assembly. This ensures that laws are reflective of the views and wishes of the people and enhances participatory democracy.
	
	There was a strong support for clauses 33 and 34 of the Bill that propose the keeping of records of all investments, donations and funds received and spent by the public school as well as the preparation of annual financial statements to be scrutinised by the parents. The view was that this will ensure the efficient running of finances of the school and ensure greater accountability.
	
	Also, the proposal for the authorisation of suitably qualified officers to conduct an investigation into the financial affairs of a public school was seen as progressive to address financial malfeasance at schools.
	
	Despite this support, there were participants who were against the declaration of financial interests by members of the School Governing Body (SGB) and their close relatives as they viewed this as an invasion of privacy and has a potential to deter the involvement of parents in the SGBs. Also, there was a fear that the proposal for SGBs to prepare quarterly financial reports will create an unnecessary administrative burden on SGBs.
	
	In supporting the Bill partially, the residents of Bojanala said that some clauses require reconsideration to ensure that the Bill achieves its intended objective. One of the major concerns raised by participants was the centralisation of power in the office of the head of the provincial departments of education. The fear was that the Bill takes away key decision-making powers of the SGB rendering them useless entities notwithstanding their proximity to schools and agility to respond to unique challenges faced by schools.
	
	With regards to home schooling, some participants were of the view that the Bill presents the necessary certainty and structure needed to guide the sector. They argued that this will ensure standardisation within the sector and to the individual school environments. Some participants, however, felt that the Bill is excessively restrictive and doesn’t take into consideration the different needs of learners.
	
	Similar to previous public hearings on the Bill, there was a call for the committee to reconsider clause 23 on the remuneration of SGB members. Participants argued that the critical work done by SGB members must be compensated by payment of a stipend.
	
	The proposal on the ban of corporal punishment at school which is contained in the Bill received an overwhelming support from the participants. They called for the department to develop alternative measures to corporal punishment as a means to protect teachers. Also, the proposal for compulsory education for leaners from Grade R was welcomed as that will ensure greater preparedness for learners and to improve the schooling system.
	
	Participants also underscored the importance of the proposal and regulation of the management of pregnancy of learners at schools. This, according to participants, will guarantee the continuation of schooling for a learner who fell pregnant at school.
	
	The committee appreciated all the views that were expressed by the participants and assured them that their views are valuable and will be considered when it deliberates on all the submissions on the Bill.
	
	The committee will today hold the second public hearing in Mafikeng. In line with the intention to enable broader access to the work of the committee and to ensure extensive consultation, the committee has resolved to hold its public hearings in the afternoons and on weekends. The public hearings are open to every individual and organisations wishing to make their submission. Details of Public Hearings (Day 2) 
	Date: Saturday, 11 March 2023
	Venue: Mafikeng Town Hall
	Time: 14:30 ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng