Parliament, Sunday, 5 March 2023 –The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education has been urged by the residents of Xrariep to reconsider certain clauses of the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill (Bela Bill) because, according to them, the clauses will not enhance the quality of the education system in the country. The committee concluded the second of three public hearings on the Bill in Koffiefontein, in the Free State yesterday.
	
	Concerned parents highlighted that the reconsideration of those clauses that included clause 4 (d), 5(c), clause 14, 16 and 34 is the only condition for their partial support to the Bill. “We have listened to your views and will continue to listen to others around the country and upon conclusion of this public consultation process we as a committee will consider the submissions and make decisions that are best for the education system,” said Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The major risk factor underlined by the participants was the centralisation of too much power in the Office of the Head of Department (HOD) in the department. They said given the fact that there is already about 24000 public schools in the country, that will inevitably create a very heavy administrative burden in the Office of the HOD and which can render it unable to carry out its basic responsibility.
	
	Regarding clause 4(d) and 5(c) participants were of the opinion that the Bill will usurp the authority and power of the School Governing Bodies (SGBs) to make decisions on the school’s admission and language policy. They argued that this decision will diminish the bond of relationship between parents and the school.
	
	Furthermore, the participants reiterated their view that the SGB is the only structure that can determine language and admission policy as it is composed of local people who understand all the socio-econonoc and cultural realities and dynamics in the community where the school exists.
	
	Another view which was proposed by some participants who supported the Bill, was that these clauses will stimulate transformation at schools and remove the misuse of power by SGBs who sometimes use their authority to exclude some learners.
	
	Regarding clause 14, some participants highlighted that the disclosure of financial interests will have an adverse effect on the willingness of parents to participate in the SGBs. This, according to them, will weaken and kill eventually an important pillar within the education system, which maintains direct involvement of parents in the education of their children. Other participants argued that the clause is necessary for the promotion of the ethics of transparency and accountability.
	
	Those in full support of the Bill told the committee that the Bill is a remedy to the challenges faced by the system of basic education. They underscored the ripple effect which is promised by the investigation and monitoring of leaner attendance in reducing drop-out rates and promotion of teaching and learning at schools. Furthermore, there was a strong view that clause 34 will strengthen governance and prevent the misuse of school funds at schools.
	
	Meanwhile, there was a concern from the participants who prefer home-schooling that the Bill overly regulates home-schooling and doesn’t take into consideration the individual needs of the children. They also highlighted that the Bill in its current form erodes the parents’ constitutional right to make decisions about their children.
	
	The Department of Basic Education told he committee that the Bill doesn’t impose the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) as claimed by participants, it instead advocates for a system graded similar or higher than CAPS. Therefore, according to the department, the concerns raised by parents about CAPS were baseless perhaps because of their misunderstanding of the Bill.
	
	The committee will today hold the last hearings in the Free State at the Simpson Sefuthi Community Hall, in Botshabelo. Details of Public Hearings (Day 3) 
	Date: Sunday, 5 March 2023
	Venue: Simpson Sefuthi Community Hall
	Time: 14:30 ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. African Christian Democratic Party on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape