Parliament, Thursday, 9 March 2023 – The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests has completed all processes in considering a complaint lodged by Mr James Lorimer, MP, and the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (OUTA) against Mr Mosebenzi Joseph Zwane, MP.
	
	The complaint emanated from the fifth Parliament and thereafter the committee established under the sixth Parliament resolved to continue with it. The two complaints were lodged on 27 June and 25 October 2017, alleging breach of the Code of Ethical Conduct and Disclosure of Members’ Interests for Assembly and Permanent Council Members. The complaints relate to the Mr Zwane’s tenure as Minister of Mineral Resources.
	
	The committee considered the complaints together with the Report of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into allegations of State Capture, Corruption and Fraud in the Public Sector including Organs of State, as they covered the same topics. The committee made the following findings on various elements of the complaint: The committee has recommended to the National Assembly various penalties against the Member for the various transgressions; namely:  The committee did not make any finding on the allegation that the Member lied or mislead Parliament in his responses to Parliamentary Questions, as the matter was dealt with in the National Assembly. The committee found that the Member did not breach the Code on the aspect of his appointment as Minister of Mineral Resources, as the reason for the appointment falls to former President Jacob Zuma.
	
	The committee is of the view that the conclusion of this matter affirms the commitment to resolve all complaints before it. Also, the committee appreciates the effort put in by Members in dealing with this matter. Furthermore, the committee appreciates the commitment to ethical leadership by complainants who, through their acts, have strengthened ethical leadership in Parliament.
	
	A full report will be published in the Parliament’s Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports.  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSONS OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS, MR BEKIZWE NKOSI AND MS LYDIA MOSHODI.  For media enquiries or interviews with the co-Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal