Parliament, Sunday, 5 March 2023 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, has said MEC Tate Makgoe passing was a loss not only in the Free State but the country.
	
	The committee sends its condolences to the family of the Free State Education MEC, Mr Makgoe and the entire basic education sector.
	
	"The MEC had done unbelievable work in education in the Free State in ensuring that the province consistently finished in the top three in Grade 12 results in the recent past."
	
	Mr Nchabeleng described MEC Makgoe as an educationist who just never doubted the value of education.
	
	The committee also sends its heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased in the Limpopo accident on the weekend.
	
	"All necessary support should be afforded to families of children affected when two scholar transport vehicles were involved in an accident."
	
	“Although investigations are pending into the causes of the accident, our children should not perish in this manner and under these conditions. All efforts should be made to ensure that scholarship transport vehicles are clearly identifiable and are not involved in any other business other than transporting learners,” said Mr Nchabeleng.
	
	Mr Nchabeleng called on drivers and owners involved in scholar transportation to always stay alert and cautious while on the road transporting children.
	
	Six learners passed among 19 killed when two scholar transport vehicles were reportedly involved in an accident with a heavy vehicle in the area of Motetema, Limpopo on Friday. It is not clear what caused the accident as investigation was ongoing.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, SPORT, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 0810526060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng