Parliament, Tuesday, 7 March 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs is confident that the senior management of the Border Management Authority (BMA) has in place all the processes necessary for the operationalisation of the entity on 1 April 2023. The committee has urged the Senior Management of both the BMA and the Department of Home Affairs to ensure that adequate support is provided for the purposes of ensuring effective implementation.
	
	The committee today engaged the BMA leadership together with the Minister of the department and it is satisfied that every process is in place to ensure effective operationalisation of the entity. The committee has highlighted, however, that it is concerned about the budget shortfalls particularly to fund Information Technology platforms for the BMA. The committee remains of the view that appropriate funding for technological interventions such as this one must be made available.
	
	The committee appreciates that the senior managers of the BMA are at an advanced stage regarding their interaction with labour which the committee considers a critical component for the effectiveness of the entity. The committee has urged the senior management of the BMA to conclude the remaining processes which include the investigation on the salary disparities and the placement of staff members into the BMA permanent structure and the harmonization of their conditions of service.
	
	The committee also received a briefing from the Minister of the department on the court case involving the 22 Afghanistan nationals who applied to court to compel the department to consider their asylum application.
	
	The committee supported the department’s intention to appeal the interim order. Furthermore, it requested the department to provide constant updates on the process.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR MOSA CHABANE.  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:  Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo