Parliament, Monday, 6 March 2023 – The residents of the greater Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality who have opted to home-school their children have called on the Department of Basic Education to engage the sector to ensure that the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill (Bela Bill) is responsive to their children’s unique needs within this system. These views were shared during the last public hearings on the Bill in Botshabelo, outside Bloemfontein, yesterday.
	
	The majority view of the home schoolers underscored that clause 37 of the Bill is overly restrictive and does not take into consideration their distinctive needs and the methods employed within this environment. They were also concerned that the departmental assessors who assess learners’ progress within the home-schooling system are not proficient, which will make it impossible to comply with the Act. They said that further research and engagement is necessary to resolve their fears.
	
	Despite these concerns, the department highlighted that the Bill doesn’t seek to prescribe the curriculum selected by those who prefer home schooling. The intention of the Bill is to ensure that whatever curriculum is selected must be at least comparable to Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) or higher.
	
	Another view presented during the hearings was that the centralisation of the language and admission policy is necessary to advance transformation, as currently many school governing bodies (SGBs), especially in urban settings, arbitrarily use these policies to exclude African learners. The ripple effects, according to participants in the hearing, was that schools in townships are overcrowded, as parents don’t have the opportunity to choose their preferred schools. Furthermore, some suggested that the Bill will ensure equality by treating all public schools the same.
	
	There were others at the hearing with a contrasting view, who suggested that the clauses on the language and admission policy are intended to target mother-tongue education, especially Afrikaans. Those sharing this view suggested that the Bill must address daily challenges facing schools, including the lack of libraries, lack of water and various infrastructure challenges.
	
	There was also a divergence of views about the clause proposing the quarterly submission of SGB financial statements, with some suggesting that it will enhance governance and entrench a culture of accountability. Others considered it nothing more than an additional administrative burden to SGB members and said it would dampen parents’ willingness to participate in SGBs.
	
	The committee has now concluded public hearings in two provinces and will next weekend move to the North West province. The committee encourages the people of North West to come out in their numbers to contribute to drafting the Bill.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga