Parliament, Wednesday 8 March 2023 – President Cyril Ramaphosa will tomorrow afternoon appear before the National Assembly to answer Questions for Oral Reply.
	
	Holding regular question and answer sessions is one way in which Parliament, as provided by section 92(2) of the Constitution, holds the President and the Executive to account. The President’s Questions for Oral Reply are scheduled at least once a quarter during session time within Parliament’s annual programme.
	
	Up to six questions about matters of national or international importance may be asked during the three-hour session. The six questions scheduled for tomorrow’s sitting cover a range of matters, including the fight against crime, government plans to build a capable developmental state for the implementation of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan (ERRP) and whether in light of the fact that section 25 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, has not been amended the President intends referring the Expropriation Bill to the Constitutional Court to determine its constitutionality.
	For the full list of questions, please click here
	
	DETAILS OF THE HYBRID PLENARY SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	Date: Thursday, 9 March 2023
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Good Hope Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform
	
	Also scheduled for tomorrow morning, the Assembly will hold its Programme Committee meeting to plan for the business of the House.
	Among other matters, the Committee meeting will consider the draft programme, committee reports, and Bills before the NA.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA VIRTUAL PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE MEETING 
	
	Date: Thursday, 9 March 2023 
	Time: 08:30 
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Masego Dlula on mdlula@parliament.gov.za later than TOMORROW, Thursday, 9 March at 11am.
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. Economic Freedom Fighters