Parliament, Sunday, 5 March 2023 – The residents of Pietermaritzburg and surrounding areas believe that there should be fines imposed on industries that pollute the environment with impunity. They expressed their support for the Climate Bill in their inputs during public hearings on the Bill that were conducted by the Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment in Pietermaritzburg yesterday.
	
	The residents further called for a stringent monitoring mechanism to be put in place by the Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment to ensure compliance by companies and individuals.
	
	There were participants who expressed a view that the Bill does not address the roles and responsibilities ordinary people have regarding climate change, especially in rural areas. They further called for the strengthening of the Bill by including indigenous knowledge to complement science.
	
	There was a call for the Bill to be explicit on the role of traditional leaders in the climate change process and not limit it to National, Provincial and local government spheres. There were participants who said some industries are being introduced into community areas without engagement with the affected communities which later leads to illegal dumping.
	
	The participants also told the committee that the predominantly black areas are neglected when it comes to waste collection and management. Representatives from community-based organizations complained about the growing landfills near residential areas and they said that is causing severe health problems in those communities.
	
	The committee will conclude its KwaZulu-Natal public hearings today at EThekwini Metropolitan Municipality’s Westville Civic Centre at 10:00.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY, FISHERIES AND ENVIRONMENT, MR POGISO MODISE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Jabulani Majozi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 083 358 5224
	E-mail: jamajozi@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of North West