Parliament, Wednesday, 8 March 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will this Friday, 10 March 2023, conduct the third leg of public hearings on the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development (UPRD) Bill [B13-2021] in KwaZulu-Natal at Gamalakhe Community Hall in Margate between 10 am and 2 pm.
	
	On Saturday and Sunday, the committee will hold public hearings at the Pietermaritzburg Town Hall in the UMgungundlovu District and Westville Civic Centre in the EThekwini Metropolitan Municipality between 10 am and 2 pm respectively.
	
	The people of Ugu and UMgungundlovu districts, as well as EThekwini Metropolitan Municipality in KZN will also have an opportunity to comment on the Bill, which seeks to separate petroleum provision from the mineral provision, as currently provided for in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (Act No. 28 of 2002). The separation is also aimed at providing two independent pieces of legislation to address matters pertinent to each industry and to bring about stability and security to investors, especially in the upstream petroleum sector.
	
	Furthermore, the Bill enhances state participation in the upstream petroleum industry and economic transformation of the industry. It includes provisions that promote petroleum resource development in a sustainable and equitable manner for the benefit of all South Africans.
	
	The first and second legs of the public hearings were conducted in Western Cape and Eastern Cape respectively. Section 59 (1) (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa requires the National Assembly to facilitate public involvement in the legislative and other processes of the NA and its committees.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Economic Freedom Fighters