Parliament, Wednesday, 8 March 2023 – The National Assembly (NA) Speaker, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, is leading a South African Parliament’s high-level delegation to the 146th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU in Manama, Bahrain. The five-day session of the 133-year-old multilateral organisation, will take place at the Exhibition World Bahrain from 11 to 15 March 2023. This oldest multilateral organisation of 178 Parliaments, is scheduled to be attended by representatives of 110 parliaments, including delegations from countries in conflict situations. The theme for the 146th Assembly of the IPU is, "Promoting peaceful coexistence and inclusive societies: Fighting intolerance”. The theme is informed by evidence that the world is at its lowest ebb of peacefulness in over 15 years because of a series of conflicts including the War in Ukraine. Speaker Mapisa-Nqakula will also be attending as a member of the IPU Task Force for the Peaceful Resolution of the War In Ukraine. The Task Force is scheduled to meet high-level delegations from both Russia and Ukraine. The parliamentarians will share best practices on promoting inclusivity and peaceful coexistence as prerequisites for resilient, cohesive and democratic societies across the world. Other special intervention groups of the IPU to provide status reports on efforts to find peaceful solutions to conflicts include the ‘Middle East Questions’, and ‘Facilitators on Cyprus’. In addition to its Yes To The Youth campaign, the IPU will launch the ‘Parliaments for the Planet’ campaign, designed to place Parliaments at the forefront of fighting global warming by, among others, reducing their carbon footprints, as part of the overall execution of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Various statutory structures of the IPU will also be meeting during the five-day assembly with members of the multi-party delegation of Parliament serving in each structure to share and advance South Africa’s position. These include the thematic Standing Committees on: Peace and International Security; Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade; Democracy and Human Rights; as well as United Nations Affairs. The South African Parliament delegation, led by Speaker Mapisa-Nqakula, includes the following members: 1. Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces and a member of the African National Congress (ANC) MP, Ms Sylvia Lucas; 2. NA House Chairperson for Committees, Oversight and ICT and a member of the ANC, MP, Mr Cedric Frolick; 3. Deputy Chief Whip of the majority party, ANC, MP - Ms Doris Dlakude; 4. Whip of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, Ms Moleboheng Modise; 5. ANC, MP, Ms Fikile Masiko; 6. Democratic Alliance MP, Dr Annelie Lotriet; 7. Chief Whip of the Economic Freedom Fighters MP, Mr Floyd Shivambu; 8. Chief Whip of the Inkatha Freedom Party MP, Mr Narend Singh; and 9. Chief Whip of the United Democratic Movement MP, Mr Nqabayomzi Kwankwa. Those wishing to do interviews with the leader of the South African Parliamentary delegation and other Members of Parliament are welcome to contact Mr Manelisi Wolela through WhatsApp and email: +27760622180 / mwolela@parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA ENQUIRIES: MOLOTO MOTHAPO Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo