Parliament, Saturday, 4 March 2023 –The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education has been informed that the current inability of many provincial Departments of Education to timeously procure and deliver Learning and Teaching Support Material (LTSM) to schools was one of the reasons that will make the implementation of clause 16 of the Basic Laws Amendment Bill (Bela Bill) which proposes the central procurement of learning materials impractical.
	
	The committee concluded the first of three public participation process yesterday at the Phuthaditjhaba Multipurpose Centre where a majority of participants underlined their partial support of the Bill because of reservations on certain clauses. The participants raised concern about the capacity challenges within provincial education departments which posed a risk of delaying delivery of learning materials to schools. They said delayed delivery has a potential and history of impacting negatively on the start of academic year.
	
	There was a strong view that the proposed clause 14 of the BELA Bill which requires members of the School Governing Boty (SGB) to disclose on an annual basis their financial interest, is unacceptable in that it will lead to the invasion of privacy of members and has a potential to deter parents from availing themselves for election as members of the SGB. This, according to the participants, will have an adverse effect on the governance of schools as less parents will be willing to participate.
	
	Similarly, there was a concern that clause 34 (5) which proposes that the SGB must submit quarterly income and expenditure report will add administrative burden on the SGB which might also deter participation by parents.
	
	Meanwhile, there was total rejection of the clause that allows the sale of alcohol on school premises for fundraising purposes. Some participants argued that the clause is self-contradictory as many provincial liquor legislation ban the sale of alcohol near schools. Some participants argued that South Africa is already facing a huge challenge in relation to substance abuse and that the passing of the Bill might promote excessive consumption of alcohol on school premises.
	
	There was convergence of views on proposals made by clause 2 on the compulsory attendance of school from grade R, with many participants arguing that this Bill will enhance the education system as learners will be taught from an early age.
	
	Although the majority of participants supported the Bill with some supporting it with conditions, there also participants who rejected it on the grounds that it entrenches too much power in the Head of Department (HOD) and erodes some of the critical functions previously given to the SGBs.
	
	There was also a plea made that the SGB is the only credible body to determine a school language policy as it understands living conditions in the communities where the school is situated. Also, there was a strong view that the centralisation of decisions will overburden the processes in the office of the HOD and will cause delays.
	
	Proponents of the home-schooling system highlighted that the Bela Bill has many restrictions that will make it difficult for parents opting for home-schooling. This was because of the view that Curriculum Assessment Policy Statements does not factor in the interests of the leaner.
	
	There was fear that the restrictions proposed by the Bela Bill denies them their constitutionally enshrined freedom of choice and learning preferences. The committee will today conduct the second session of public hearings in the Free State at Koffiefontein Multi-purpose centre. The public participation process will start at 14:30.
	
	Details of Public Hearings (Day 2) 
	Date: Saturday, 4 March 2023
	Venue: Koffiefontein Multi-Purpose Centre
	Time: 14:30
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress