Parliament, Sunday, 12 March 2023 – Citizens of the City of Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality in Gauteng have told the Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment that they cannot support the Climate Change Bill because of inadequate information about it, and they fear that the legislation will close down industries. Yesterday the committee held public hearings at the DH Williams Hall in Katlehong to solicit public inputs on the draft legislation. A majority of the people who spoke raised concerns about the lack of awareness and that they don’t really know much about climate change and as a result cannot support the draft legislation. Others felt that the explanation of the bill by the committee was of a very high level, and doesn’t speak to people on the ground. They said it was difficult to have an opinion on the bill due to inadequate education on the subject of climate change. The community also asked if reducing greenhouse gas emissions would result in stopping industrialisation and closing factories, and how are jobs in the factories are going to be saved. Those who opposed the Bill claimed that South Africa was being forced into a conversation that doesn’t affect its people and that the commitment to reduce gas emissions will disadvantage developing countries. Others told the committee that South Africa must have its own conditions for reducing emissions and not the ones set by developed countries. However, there were those who accepted the Bill, however, they claimed they were not happy with the parliamentary process, and asked the committee to improve the public education campaign on the Bill. Committee Chairperson Mr Pogiso Modise thanked the people of Ekurhuleni for their honesty. “Climate change is a complicated process that needs a balanced and careful approach, failure to do so could lead to unintended consequences. “And is also an urgent matter – let’s talk about how do we put adaptation system, we can’t stop the rain and the sun but we can put systems,” said the Chairperson. Today the committee will hold public hearings in Merafong Local Municipality. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY, FISHERIES AND ENVIRONMENT, MR POGISO MODISE. For media enquiries or interviews with the committee Chairperson, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena Cell: 081 705 2130 Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga