Parliament, Monday 06 March 2023 - Secretary to Parliament Mr Xolile George described the reconstruction of Parliament as a unique historical opportunity for reimagining and infusing deep heritage elements with modernity to meet demands of a people's Parliament.
	
	Mr George said this during the handing over of the fire-gutted parliamentary buildings by the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure and its implementing agency, Coega, to the Parliamentary team. Parliament announced recently that it will partner with implementing agent, the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA), which was also present at the handover meeting, in the reconstruction project.
	
	The Secretary said South Africa is a melting pot of various cultures, with its Parliament resembling many facets of the people's rich heritage, some of which were destroyed. He said every effort will be made to preserve as much of such heritage as possible while reimagining and building a capable and responsive African Parliament.
	
	"We must ensure that modernity and heritage blend perfectly, and this is a challenge we are placing on the desk of the architectural team. The team must ensure the new buildings meet the requirements of modern communications technology, occupational safety and those that support the constitutional work of Parliament, including ensuring adequate capacity for joint sittings of both houses, additional oversight committee rooms and more capacity for public gallery", said Mr George today.
	
	He said the fire crisis also necessitated higher levels of vigilance in mitigating all kinds of risks, including unprecedented weather patterns, so that nothing can disrupt Parliament's business continuity in future.
	
	Every effort will be made to ensure that the reconstruction programme is concluded within the set period of two years, stressed the Secretary to Parliament. An internal capacity has also been created to assist Parliament in managing the reconstruction programme through its implementing agency, the DBSA.
	
	Issued by Parliament of the Republic of South AfricaEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Democratic Alliance