Parliament, Wednesday, 25 January 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Innovation is of the view that the University of Zululand is ready for the 2023 academic year. The committee is conducting oversight visits in KwaZulu-Natal Province to engage with Post-School Education and Training institutions in the province on governance and management related-matters, teaching and learning, expanding access to education and training.
	
	The committee will also visit science, technology and innovation initiatives under the Department of Science and Innovation. The committee is satisfied with the stakeholder relations and synergies between the council, management, Student Representative Council (SRC) and Institutional Forum, and it said that is quintessential to a successful start of the academic year.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee Ms Nompendulo Mkhatshwa said: “The SRC is a recognised governance structure of the institution and such we welcome the initiatives and programs of the SRC that contribute to a successful start of the academic year.”
	
	The committee further commended the efforts by the university to extend the registration period and if necessary also the allowance of walk-in registration in understanding the challenges faced by students coming from rural communities.
	
	The committee noted that the University of Zululand had committed itself to pay students who are confirmed by the National Students Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) to be eligible for funding, living allowances while waiting for NSFAS to pay the university the upfront payment. “We are of the view that this is a progressive step to ensure that students can be able to pay residence fees to private providers, have meals and transport fare to come to the institution,” added Ms Mkhatshwa.
	
	During its walk-about, the committee observed that the university is building a new engineering facility to expand on the offering of the engineering programmes. The committee further applauded the university for developing a safety and security app solution for students to report if they have safety concerns; the SRC said the app has assisted many students to receive prompt intervention.
	
	The committee also interacted with the Umfolozi TVET College where it visited two of its campuses, Esikhawini as well as the Richards Bay Campus. Starting at Esikhawini, the committee lauded the ability for the college to partner in order to strengthen the teaching and learning experience for its students.
	
	The college’s partnerships span across various disciplines, from Germany in finding ways of maximizing training space to Panama in the Maritime studies. The committee was also impressed by the way in which the college’s Richards Bay campus was equipped.
	
	The committee implored on the council, management, students and labour representatives to have a stakeholder engagement within three weeks and report back to the committee given the lack of stakeholder relations articulated by some stakeholders in the meeting.
	
	The committee will continue with its week-long oversight visit programme in KZN where it visits colleges, universities and science institutions.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND INNOVATION, MS NOMPENDULO MKHATSHWA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Jabulani Majozi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 083 358 5224
	E-mail: jamajozi@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape