Parliament, Monday, 30 January 2023 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will from tomorrow, 31 January, hold a three-day hybrid training workshop to empower its Members to undertake their constitutional function of holding the Executive accountable. The training will, amongst others, discuss how Members can effectively use and interpret the Constitution; the NCOP’s Rules; and the various available laws and policies to conduct oversight effectively and robustly. The objective of the training is “to ensure a member-centric integrated personal development and informative session to empower MPs to undertake their constitutional function of holding the Executive accountable.” The training will also focus on the application of the sub judice rule in Parliament; developing effective Municipal Support and Intervention mechanisms; understanding the Constitutional Role and Mandate of the NCOP in the Oversight Process and the principles guiding public participation in Parliament and its Committees. DETAILS OF THE NCOP HYBRID TRAINING WORKSHOP: Date: Tuesday, 31 January to Thursday, 02 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Cape Town Lodge Hotel, 87 Buitengracht Street, Cape Town, and Virtual Platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the training should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Nolizwi Magwagwa at nmagwagwa@parliament.gov.za or via WhatsApp at 081 716 5824. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on the Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notifications of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape