Parliament, Wednesday, 25 January 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy as well as the Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communication will over the next two days meet various stakeholders at Eskom to assess efforts to resolve South Africa’s energy crisis.
	
	The committees are adamant that the constant load shedding is having an adverse impact on the country and is exacerbating its socio-economic challenges. “The aim of the interaction is to assess the interventions being rolled out to address the energy challenge and ensure security of energy supply. A secure energy supply will add impetus to efforts to grow the economy and address the unemployment challenge,” said Mr Khaya Magaxa, the Chairperson of the portfolio committee.
	
	To achieve desired solutions, the committees are aware that there is a need for holistic engagement with all stakeholders to ensure common vision. “It is for this fact that the committees will engage various stakeholders, including organised labour, the Eskom Board and senior management, to ensure that there is a common goal that the entity is working towards. We have a responsibility as public representatives to do oversight and ensure challenges are resolved,” said Mr Zolani Mkiva, the Chairperson of the select committee.
	
	Some of the issues to be addressed during the meetings include the security of electricity supply, the operational state of all power stations, governance at the entity, solutions to the current load shedding, as well as alleged sabotage and theft at power stations. Details of the visit 
	Date: Thursday, 26 January 2023
	Venue: Eskom Megawatt Park
	Time: 09:00
	
	Details of the visit
	Date: Friday, 27 January 2023
	Venue: Eskom Megawatt Park
	Time: 09:00
	
	NB: Journalists wishing to cover the visit must RVSP using details below. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY AND SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND COMMUNICATION. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress