Parliament, Tuesday, 14 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport has learnt with shock of the deaths of 20 people in Limpopo on Tuesday, following an accident involving a tour bus.
	
	The committee sends its heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased and wishes those who were injured a speedy recovery.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Lisa Mangcu, said although the details around the accident remain unclear, it is important for drivers to be cautious on the roads. A number of provinces in South Africa are experiencing heavy rains and drivers are urged to be very vigilant on the roads as they could easily lose control of their vehicles.
	
	Media reports revealed that a tour bus collided head-on with a money-carrying truck and toppled over a bridge along the N1 in Limpopo. “This accident had a potential to be a catastrophe considering that the bus carried a full load of 70 passengers. We are saddened by how these individuals lost their lives; this carnage should not happen in South Africa,” said Mr Mangcu.
	
	Mr Mangcu said the collapse of road infrastructure due to flooding is a future challenge. He called on municipalities and the South African National Roads Agency to think about auditing affected roads and assessing the impact of heavy rain on service delivery.
	
	“As the committee we are concerned that service delivery in the country will suffer and road infrastructure backlogs will be on the increase, and that these serious accidents will become a norm,” he said.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR LISA MANGCU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng