Parliament, Saturday, 11 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture has learnt with shock of the passing of the famous musician Kiernan Forbes who is famously known as AKA.
	
	The musician was killed together with his former manager at Florida Road in Durban on Friday. A third person believed to be her personal bodyguard, is reported to have survived the hit and is in hospital.
	
	The committee sends its heartfelt condolences to the relatives of the deceased and the music industry. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Beauty Dlulane, said this was a loss to the industry, to the South African nation and abroad.
	
	“It is unfortunate that South Africa had lost one of her prominent sons in this manner, in the week when our artists have just raised our flag on the global stage. We found ourselves having to lower our flag and badge in honour of this fallen giant of the hip hop genre,” said Ms Dlulane.
	
	Ms Dlulane said no one should be killed in this fashion and certainly not AKA. “We call on authorities to do all they could to protect South Africans from this new scourge of what seems to be contract and revenge killings where performing artists and DJs seem to be targeted.”
	
	The committee wished that the passing of AKA will inject a new spirit into the music industry and that the hip hop genre becomes better for it. “May his soul rest in peace. Arts and culture is poorer.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape