Parliament, Sunday, 26 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation has welcomed the progress reported on the reconfiguration of water boards, and it is hopeful that the realignment will ensure efficiencies and ensure the achievement of targets that will translate into the delivery of water to people. The committee remains concerned that there are still challenges that deny people access to water.
	
	“We are hopeful that the reconfiguration will assist in better economies of scale for water boards, enable better cross subsidisation and increased financial sustainability as well as enhance market capitalisation for infrastructure projects. But we must caution against cosmetic changes that don’t bring about tangible results and access to water for the people,” said Mr Robert Mashego, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee welcomed progress on the realignment which is at various stages with an envisioned completion by March 2023.
	
	The committee has called for improvement of relationships with municipalities to promote the payment of services essentially because the financial sustainability of these water boards remains critical for their existence. It remains a concern that the water boards are owed R16.1 billion as of 31 December 2022 due to non-payment by municipalities. Also, their poor financial position arises from poor payment by their clients and that negatively impacts on their ability to raise funds for capital projects.
	
	The committee remains concerned that five water boards, namely: Amatola, Bloem, Lepelle, Mhlathuze and Rand Water, are performing below the 80% of planned targets which also directly impacts on their ability to deliver services. The committee has urged the water boards to find solutions to the challenges they face to ensure that they have the required capacity to meet their mandate of the delivery of water to the people.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee has rejected the excuse that some of the water boards are underperforming because of the shortage of chlorine gas, an old excuse that was raised to the committee previously. The committee had urged the Department of Water and Sanitation to work with the Department of Trade and Industry to resolve the problem of the shortage of chlorine, especially because of the importance of chlorine in ensuring quality of water.
	
	The committee has called for close collaboration between the water boards and municipalities to improve the operations of the municipalities’ Waste Water Treatment plants to ensure improved quality of discharged water. The committee highlighted its concern that the poor water quality has been raised by many water boards and they have highlighted a need for urgent improvement as this affects the entire value chain. Furthermore, the committee has called for investment in bulk water infrastructure to reduce water losses.
	
	Regarding governance, the committee remains concerned by the poor audit outcomes of Amatola, Mhlathuze which achieved unqualified audit opinions. Generally, the committee has called on the department to ensure that the governance structures are in place in all water boards and that senior managers are appointed.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND SANITATION, MR ROBERT MASHEGO.  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:  Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of North West