An emotional Mr Peter Kuiper has welcomed the intentions of the Railway Safety Bill and suggested that it will bring back the hope that was lost with the gradual deterioration of railway services. Mr Kuiper was speaking during public hearings on the Bill hosted by the Portfolio Committee on Transport at the Nangoza Jebe Hall in Gqeberha. “When I heard that the railway is going to be brought back, it instilled new life in me. I am a child of the railway; I lived and benefited from the railway. The railway gave jobs and lives to so many people in this country even without a qualification. It made it possible to feed your family with the barest of minimums,” Mr Kuiper suggested. There was general agreement during the public hearings that a safe railway system will encourage people to use train services, as it is cheap and user-friendly. “It brings tears to my eyes when I think of the railway in the Karoo region. My father would be gone for a week for menial jobs and would return on Friday bringing stale bread. He could do this because the trains were cheap and he could afford to come home often,” Mr Kuiper emphasised. There was also general agreement on the need to re-establish the railway safety police, as they enhanced safety within the railway environment. Some participants also called for closer collaboration between rail operators and the South African Police Service to increase visibility and enhance safety. But Mr Kuiper called for the deployment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) to help with securing rail services. “Recently there was a security challenge in the country during Covid-19. The President called on the SANDF to step in and they responded. The current theft and vandalism of railway services demands the deployment of the SANDF,” Mr Kuiper suggested. Many participants also called for timelines to be set for the Bill’s implementation, as many progressive bills are passed but implementation is sluggish, they said. Meanwhile, there was a general support of Chapter 6 of the Bill that deals with enforcement through railway safety inspectors who will ensure safety standards are adhered to. Despite this, there was a call to remove clause 44 (6), which sets out the times when an inspector can execute a warrant to enter and inspect any premises. Participants felt that the clause stating that a warrant can be executed only from 8 am to 5 pm each day other than a Saturday, Sunday and public holidays is not helpful, as safety standards might be undermined outside the hours stipulated in the Bill. Participants called for the Bill to empower railway safety inspectors to do their work around the clock and outside the limitation of time. The committee appreciated the qualitative inputs made by participants and assured residents that their inputs will be considered when the committee deliberates on the Bill. “This process presents us with an opportunity to hear first-hand how these laws might affect you. The contributions that were made here today will empower us to make informed decisions and ensure that the Bill caters to the demands of the public,” said Mr Lisa Mangcu, the Chairperson of the committee. Malatswa Molepo
	20 February 2023 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal