Parliament, Monday, 6 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment has concluded its public hearings on the Climate Change Bill in Mpumalanga. The committee visited the province’s three districts: Gert Sibande, Nkangala and Ehlanzeni, to solicit citizens’ input on the draft legislation, which seeks to craft an effective response to the impacts of climate change and reduce carbon emissions in South Africa. A majority of residents supported the Bill and understood the importance of saving the planet by taking care of the environment and reducing carbon emissions. However, they were concerned about the loss of employment that could arise as a result of the planned decommissioning of coal power stations and the possible closure of coal mines. The committee visited the district of Ehlanzeni last. Residents there asked if the renewable energy sector has the capacity to create enough job opportunities to make up for the job losses that will come with the discontinuation of coal. They also recommended the urgent necessity of getting trucks off the road by reintroducing rail transport, as this would also reduce carbon emissions. The Climate Change Bill seeks to ensure the effective management of inevitable climate change impacts by enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change, with a view to building social, economic and environmental resilience and adequate national adaptation response in the context of the global climate change response. The Acting Chairperson of the committee, Ms Nqabisa Gantsho, thanked the people of Mpumalanga for participating in the public hearings and for their inputs towards improving the Climate Change Bill. The committee will continue conducting public hearings in all the provinces to give every citizen an opportunity to participate in the process. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY, FISHERIES AND ENVIRONMENT, MS NQABISA GANTSHO. For media enquiries or interviews with the committee Chairperson, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	Email:smokoena@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga