Parliament, Sunday 05 February 2023 – A media briefing to outline the logistics of hosting the State of the Nation Address, a special Joint Sitting to honour the life of the former Speaker of the National Assembly, Dr Frene Ginwala, and the 2023 State of the Nation Address are the key items on the programme of Parliament this week.  Parliament’s Presiding Officers, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly (NA) Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Mr Amos Masondo, will on Monday at 11 am address the media on the state of readiness to host the 2023 State of the Nation Address. The briefing will be held at the Imbizo Centre in the 120 Plein Building.  Immediately after the briefing Speaker Mapisa-Nqakula will also use the opportunity to publicly swear-in new Members of the NA.  The special Joint Sitting of the NA and the NCOP, to pay tribute to an outstanding leader of our struggle for liberation and the founding Speaker of the first NA in democratic South Africa, will be convened at the Cape Town City Hall tomorrow (Monday, 06 February) at 2 pm.  The City Hall has since 01 February been temporarily declared a Parliamentary precinct to facilitate the hosting of the State of the Nation Address on 09 February and the Budget Speech on 22 February. The Address by the President of the Republic is scheduled to take place at 7 pm on Thursday.  The 2023 State of the Nation Address is one of the most important annual events in the parliamentary calendar and is the only ceremonial occasion that brings together the three arms of the State (the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary) under one roof. The Joint Sitting is called specifically for the President to deliver the address and no other business may be considered at this Sitting. It provides the President with an opportunity to speak to the nation on South Africa’s general state of affairs, to reflect on a wide range of political, economic and social matters within the domestic and global context, to account to the nation on the work of government and to set out government’s programme of action.  ABOUT 5 COMMITTEE MEETINGS ARE SCHEDULED FOR THIS WEEK:  TUESDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2023  Joint Meeting: Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance, to be briefed by National Treasury on the amendment of the Joint Standard 2 of 2020 on margin requirements for non-central cleared over-the-counter derivatives standards]  Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, is scheduled to consider and adopt the C Bill of the Electoral Amendment and the Report to the National Assembly]  Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, to be briefed by Department of Basic Education on School-Readiness 2023]  Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration (Sub-Committee), Shortlisting of the Candidates for the Public Service Commission Commissioner vacancy  WEDNESDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2023  Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure, to receive a briefing from the Department of Transport on the Economic Regulation of Transport Bill [B 1B – 2020, (s76)]   For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/parliament-programme   ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape