Parliament, Wednesday, 1 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation has urged the Department of International Relations and Cooperation to ensure that the good standard and appearance of the state protocol lounge at OR Tambo International Airport is extended to the other such lounges at Cape Town and King Shaka international airports.
	
	The committee emphasised that a dignitary using the state protocol lounge at King Shaka International Airport should not experience any differences in service in any of these facilities. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, urged officials to ensure that a mechanism is put in place to promote the disclosure of client satisfaction with the service provided in order to ensure ongoing improvement in services.
	
	The committee also highlighted the security risk posed by energy challenges for international dignitaries using these airport lounges. The committee suggested that the department should consider proposing that they are exempted from load-shedding, as with other national key point sites. Members of the committee said it would be an intolerable embarrassment to the country if a head of state arrived at one of these facilities in the dark because of load-shedding.
	
	The committee’s visit to the state protocol lounge at King Shaka International Airport yesterday forms part of the committee’s week-long oversight programme to inspect the department’s facilities and premises, including a visit to the Diplomatic Academy.
	
	The committee also visited the site that has been identified in Midrand for building the Pan African Parliament’s headquarters. At the site, the committee received briefings from the departments of International Relations and Public Works and Infrastructure, on the state of the project, which started in 2004.
	
	Although no concrete progress report was provided by both departments, the committee heard that R3.2 million is paid monthly for rental towards the accommodation of the PAP at Gallagher Estate in Midrand.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503n1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress