Parliament: Sunday, 19 February 2023 - The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy has concluded the first round of public hearings on the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B13-2021], which were held in the West Coast, Overberg and Garden Route districts in the Western Cape.
	
	The residents of these districts expressed different views with some supporting the Bill, while others opposing it.
	
	Those who opposed it gave reasons that included the fact that they were not properly informed about the Bill and that oil and gas drilling threatens the environment, marine life as well as survival of the fisher men.
	
	Meanwhile, supporters of the Bill were of the view that it will enhance better management and development of petroleum resources in the country, thereby creating more job opportunities.
	
	Others called for curtailment of the power that is given to the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy on behalf of the State in terms of clause 3 of the Bill.
	
	Clause 3 of the Bill reads: “The state is empowered to control, administer, and manage any reconnaissance permit, permission to remove, retention permit and petroleum right, and prescribe administrative fees and any other fees payable in terms of the Bill.”
	
	The Bill seeks to separate petroleum provisions from mineral provisions as currently provided for in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act [Act No. 28 of 2002].
	
	This separation was necessitated by the need to provide for two independent pieces of legislation addressing matters pertinent to each industry and to bring about stability and security to investors, especially in the upstream petroleum sector.
	
	The committee has recorded all inputs from members of the public and will consider them during its deliberations on the Bill at the end of the public hearing process in all provinces. The second round of public hearings will be held in the Eastern Cape and will be followed by KwaZulu-Natal. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Justice MolafoTel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape