Parliament, Monday, 6 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture sends its heartfelt condolences he friends, family and wider football community on the passing of Orlando Pirates and Bafana Bafana stalwart player Mr John Moeti. May they be comforted in this time of sadness.
	
	The Chairperson Beauty Dlulane said the country has lost one of its decorated sons. “He was aptly nicknamed Dunga, for his stature and astute football that had similarities to the Brazilian star Dunga.”
	
	Ms Dlulane added: “This is sad news when our national team seemed to struggle to take off, and thus needed all the brains in their fold. Moeti’s Bafana Bafana was so dominant, such that result was always a given, with doubt only around score lines.”
	
	Moeti was part of the committed Class of 1996 who won the Africa Cup of Nations, the only South African team to have achieved this. “We are saddened at this loss and words can never be enough to express our condolences on behalf of this fallen Buccaneer.” The committee also extends its heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Oshwin Andries, the former Stellenbosch Football Club player who passed away on Saturday. According to media reports, Oshwin succumbed to stab wounds and passed away in his mother’s arms. Ms Dlulane said the committee is with the family during this very difficult and trying time. The committee condemns the violent manner of his death and said the culprit in this crime must face the full might of the law. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 0810526060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Free State