Parliament, Wednesday, 15 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy will this Friday, 17 February 2023, begin three days of public hearings on the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development Bill [B13-2021] in the Western Cape at Skilpad Hall in Vrednburg between 10 am and 2 pm.
	
	On Saturday and Sunday, the public hearings will proceed at the Caledon Town Hall in Overberg District and Pacaltsdorp Hall in George in the Garden Route District between 10 am and 2 pm respectively.
	
	The people of West Coast, Overberg and Garden Route districts in the Western Cape will have an opportunity to comment on the Bill, which seeks to separate petroleum provision from mineral provision, as currently provided for in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (Act No. 28 of 2002). The separation is also aimed at providing two independent pieces of legislation to address matters pertinent to each industry and to bring about stability and security to investors, especially in the upstream petroleum sector.
	
	Furthermore, the Bill enhances state participation in the upstream petroleum industry and economic transformation of the industry. It includes provisions that promote petroleum resources development in a sustainable and equitable manner for the benefit of all South Africans.
	
	From the Western Cape, the committee will continue with public hearings in Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. Section 59 (1) (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa requires the National Assembly to facilitate public involvement in the legislative and other processes of the NA and its committees.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. Congress of the People on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo