Parliament, Sunday, 26 February 2023 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, Ms Nonhlanhla Ncube-Ndaba congratulates the Proteas Women on beating the second best team in the world, England on Friday in the T20 World Cup currently taking place in Cape Town. The Proteas Women now proceed onto the ICC Women’s T20 World Cup final.
	
	Ms Ncube-Ndaba said the entire South African nation feels proud about the team and its victory against England. The committee, the South African nation and the South African women in particular, are behind this amazing team and are looking forward to what is set to be an exhilarating final against the defending champions, Australia today.
	
	Ms Ncube-Ndaba said there will never be a better and strategic opportunity for these women to write a new chapter in history about South Africa on the world platform. “What this group of young women has already achieved will live with many for a long time. They are an inspiration for many young aspiring female cricketers,” said Ms Ncube-Ndaba.
	
	She said the excitement and energy ahead of today’s clash was reminiscent of the 1995 and 2010 world cup competitions on home ground. “Ms Ncube-Ndaba wished both teams luck and urged South Africans to fulfil their role and rally behind our women cricketers.
	
	Proteas women are the first South African cricket team to ever reach an ICC final. “We wish the South African women’s cricket side victory today.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape