Parliament, Sunday, 26 February 2023 - The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education was urged by the residents of Mopani District to ensure that the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill contains a provision in it for harsher penalty for parents who undermine clause 2 (1) of the Bill, a provision which proposes that basic education is compulsory for every learner from grade R.
	
	That view and other views were shared by participants during the public hearings that were held on the Bill yesterday in Lenyenye Community Hall outside Tzaneen in Limpopo’s Mopani District.
	
	These views were based on an opinion that compulsory education at schools presents a solid foundation for further schooling, and is a necessary transitional period that prepares learners for the rigours of formal schooling. Also, there was a view that better prepared learners at foundation phase will reduce the drop-out rate which is unacceptably high currently. The view was that 12 months which is proposed in the Bill is not enough to deter defiance by some parents.
	
	The participants welcomed clause 5 (6) of the Bill arguing that it will make education inclusive. On clause 36, they argued that it must be strengthened and that the clause must enable the Head of the Department (HOD) of Basic Education to regulate fees charged by independent schools.
	
	The majority of participants registered their support for the Bill and proposed further amendments on it. In Thohoyandou, as well, there were participants who rejected the clause in the Bill which allows the sale of liquor on school premises. They based their rejection of the clause on grounds of the worrying escalating trend of substance abuse in South Africa especially by young people.
	
	Despite the majority support of the Bill there were those who opposed it because in their view the Bill is not promoting mother tongue education in schools. Some parents raised a concern that the Bill in its current form centralises power in the HOD and deprives parents and schools their right to determine rules for their school. They called for the department to intervene only when there is an evidence that the school is using a language policy which discriminates and when there is an inconsistency with what is spelt out in the Bill.
	
	An argument was also made that the Bill in its current form allows the department to abuse its power and deny learners a right to mother tongue education. According to those that support home schooling, the Bela Bill has many restrictions that will make it difficult for parents who choose home-schooling as it imposes one curriculum and one philosophy. This, according to them, deprives parents and learners their constitutionally enshrined freedom of choice particularly for learning preferences.
	
	The committee appreciated the inputs it received from the participants and assured them that their views will be taken into consideration when it deliberates on the Bill. The committee will today hold public hearings in Capricorn District Municipality at the Jack Botes Hall in Polokwane. It invites individuals and organisations to attend the hearings to make contributions on the Bill. Details of the hearings
	Date: Sunday, 26 February 2023
	Time: 12:00
	Venue: Jack Botes Hall, Polokwane ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA.  For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:  Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape