Parliament, Wednesday, 01 February 2023 - The two Houses of Parliament, the National Assembly (NA) and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will convene a special joint sitting, on Monday 06 February, to honour and celebrate the life of the late founding Speaker in our democratic Parliament, Dr Frene Ginwala.
	
	The liberation struggle stalwart passed away at her Cape Town home on the 12th of February 2023.
	
	The two Houses of Parliament will meet jointly to remember this torchbearer of the post-apartheid Parliament, who was instrumental in the formation of South Africa’s democratic National Legislature
	
	DETAILS OF THE SPECIAL SITTING:
	
	Date: Monday, 06 February 2023
	Time: 2 pm
	Venue: Cape Town City Hall
	
	From 01 February 2023, the City Hall has been handed over to the Parliament of the RSA in preparation for SONA 2023. During this period, the area surrounding the City Hall, including Monday 06 February, will be closed off, and there will be one point of entry into this facility, namely the Corporation Street entrance.
	
	For interviews with the Presiding Officers and high-ranking Parliament officials on the Special Joint Sitting, you may contact Xihlamariso Ngoveni at xngoveni@parliament.gov.za
	
	All media wishing to physically attend the Joint Special Sitting should send their details (full name, name of media house, ID or passport number) to Mr Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za.
	
	Members of the media who wish to observe the hybrid sitting on the virtual platform should forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward their requests using official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see the links below.
	
	You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notifications of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	ENQUIRIES: Moloto Mothapo Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West