Parliament, Sunday 26 February 2023 – Questions for Oral Reply by Peace and Security cluster, National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Committees Strategic Annual Reviews, and virtual mini plenary sessions will all form part of the parliamentary programme this week.
	
	The National Assembly’s (NA) hybrid plenary sitting on Tuesday at 14:00, will deliberate and consider several committee reports that include: Meanwhile, the NCOP will this week hold a three-day virtual strategic review and planning sessions for its Committees starting on Tuesday to Thursday. The sessions will start at 10:00 daily. One of the key objectives of the strategic planning sessions is to assess the implementation of legislation adopted by Parliament, review key achievements and identify lessons learnt in the 6th term of Parliament. Furthermore, the sessions will take stock of what transpired in the 6th Parliament with the intention to better plan for the remainder of the term.
	
	The NA’s hybrid plenary sitting starting at 14:00 on Wednesday is scheduled to host an oral questions and answer session with Ministers in the Peace and Security Cluster. The Cluster comprises of national departments of Defence and Military Veterans, Home Affairs, International Relations and Cooperation, Justice and Correctional Services, Police and the Minister in the Presidency.
	
	As provided for in section 92(2) of the Constitution, Parliament utilises the oral questions and answer sessions and other related mechanisms to hold the Executive accountable. In this regard, the President, Deputy President, and all the Cabinet Ministers are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their functions.
	
	Both, the NA and the NCOP on Thursday at 08.30, will convene their respective Programme Committee meetings to plan for the business of Parliament. The meetings will consider the draft programmes, committee reports, and Bills before the two Houses of Parliament.
	
	Also on Thursday at its hybrid plenary sitting at 14:00, the NA will hold virtual mini-plenary sessions as follows:
	
	Mini-plenary 1: Mini-plenary 2: Later this week from 3 – 5 March 2023, four (4) parliamentary portfolio committees will continue to embark on the national legislature’s public participation programme through public hearings. The Portfolio Committee (PC) on Basic Education will visit the Free State province for the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill, the PC on Mineral Resources and Energy will be in the Eastern Cape for the Upstream Petroleum Resources Development Bill, the PC on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment to visit the KwaZulu/Natal on the Climate Change Bill and PC on Transport will be in the Northern Cape for the Railway Safety Bill public hearings.  There are twenty-one (21) committee meetings scheduled for this week, that include:  TUESDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2023Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by the Department of Home Affairs (DHA), the Electoral Commission (IEC) and the Government Printing Works (GPW) on their budget allocations for the 2022-23 financial year.  Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Briefing on 3rd quarter performance by the Department of Cooperative Governance (DCOG), Municipal Infrastructure Support Agent (MISA) and Department of Traditional Affairs (DTA).  Portfolio Committee on Communications: Briefing by the Department on: (i) overhaul of IT Systems at Postbank; (ii) measures in place to address Going Concerns in the Portfolio; and (iii) consequence management in the Portfolio; Briefing by Department on: (i) progress made on outstanding criminal cases at SAPO; (ii) SAPO financial crisis; and (iii) the BBI and Sentech merger; Briefing by SAPO on progress made on implementation of the Post Office of Tomorrow; and (ii) status of SAPO outlets and operations; Adoption of the 2022/23 First and Second Quarter Expenditure and Financial Reports of the DCDT and GCIS; Adoption of Report of the Auditor-General on the Material Irregularities in National, Provincial and Local Government (if available); Adoption of report on additional reporting of the BBI and Postbank Annual Reports and Financial Statements for 2021/2022; Adoption of outstanding minutes.  Joint Meeting: Standing Committee on Finance, Standing Committee on Appropriations, Select Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by Financial and Fiscal Commission and Parliamentary Budget Office on the 2023 Budget.  Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities: Briefing by the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities on the National Council on Gender Based Violence and Femicide Bill (B31-2022); Consideration and adoption of minutes.  Portfolio Committee on Basic Education: Consideration and Adoption of Outstanding draft minutes and draft reports; Briefing by Department of Basic Education on Second Quarterly Report 2022/23.  Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment: Briefing on the First and Second Quarterly Reports for 2022/23 financial year: DFFE, including Marine Living Resources Fund, SANParks; and iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority.  Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation: Briefing by the Department of Water and Sanitation on the Third Quarter Expenditure and Performance Report 2022/2023 financial year; Consideration and adoption of minutes.  WEDNESDAY, 1 MARCH 2023 Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure: Consideration and adoption of the Budget Review and Recommendations Report (BRRR); Consideration of the report from the Auditor-General on the Material irregularities in National, Provincial and Local Government: Tabled: 09 September 2022(ATC: No 135/2022), Referred: 13 September 2022 (ATC No. 137/2022).  Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Briefing on 3rd quarter performance by South African Local Government Association (SALGA), Municipal Demarcation Board |(MDB) and CRL Rights Commission.  Joint Meeting: Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance: Public hearings on 2023 Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals. Standing Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by National Treasury on the 2023 Division of Revenue Bill.  Portfolio Committee on Police: SAPS 3rd Quarter Expenditure and performance; Petitions referred to the Committee.  Portfolio Committee on Small Business Development: Briefing by the Department of Small Business Development on the implementation of the BRRR recommendations (2022); Briefing by the Constitutional and Legal Service Office (CLSO) - Legislative Drafting Unit on the proposed Committee Bill [Small Enterprise Commission/Ombudsman]; Consideration and adoption of minutes.  Portfolio Committee on Employment & Labour: Briefing by Department of Employment and Labour on an update with regards to filling of vacant posts.  THURSDAY, 2 MARCH 2023Joint Standing Committee on Defence: Briefing by the SANDF and Armscor on initiatives to improve the availability of spares for prime-mission equipment; Briefing by the DOD on projects allocated to Armscorand the level of satisfaction with these projects, including services rendered by the Armscor Dockyard; Briefing by the Chief Reserves on activities, challenges and way ahead; Consideration of outstanding minutes.  FRIDAY, 3 MARCH 2023 Joint Standing Committee on Financial Management of Parliament: Update and progress made in the restoration of buildings affected by the 2 January 2022 fire on the parliamentary precinct and related matters: Briefings by Parliament and the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure; Parliament’s performance in the Third Quarter of 2022/23: briefing by the Secretary to Parliament; Adoption of Committee minutes: 24 February 2022.  Joint Meeting: Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance: Responses by National Treasury on submissions received during public hearings on the Fiscal framework and Revenue Proposals.  Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation: Presentations by Rand Water, Umngeni Water, uMhlathuze Water and Bloem Water Boards: synopsis and overview of their work as reflected in the 2021/22 Annual Reports.  For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly), please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/parliament-programme  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal