Parliament, Thursday, 2 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport will this weekend hold public hearings on the Railway Safety Bill [B 7-2021] in KwaZulu-Natal. The hearings form part of a nationwide public participation process that aims to embed community participation in the law-making process to ensure that legislation passed by Parliament takes into consideration the lived experiences of the people.
	
	Public consultation and participation is a constitutional requirement that Parliament is obliged to undertake as part of its decision-making processes. “These hearings are in line with Section 59 (1) of the Constitution, which urges public involvement in the legislative-making process of the Assembly. Also, we are hopeful that as the primary beneficiaries of the protections proposed by the Bill, participants will present qualitative inputs aimed at improving the Bill ensuring safe railway operations,” said Mr Lisa Mangcu, the Chairperson of the Committee.
	
	The Bill aims to amend the National Railway Safety Regulator Act 16 of 2002 by facilitating an improvement in general safety within the railway environment, and ensure that rail becomes an attractive mode of transport and contributes towards economic growth. This will ensure that rail contributes directly towards economic growth, which is a platform to effectively fight inequality, poverty and unemployment.
	
	In the effort to align legislation with the White Paper on National Rail Policy and government’s plan to move passengers and freight from road to rail, the Bill proposes and promotes the use of rail as an efficient mode of transport. Also, the bill aims to facilitate a modern, flexible and efficient regulatory regime that ensures the continuing enhancement of safe railway operations across the country. Details of the visit (Day 1) 
	Date: Friday, 3 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Ngwelezane Community Hall, Richards Bay
	
	Details of the visit (Day 2) 
	Date: Saturday, 4 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Pietermaritzburg City Hall, Pietermaritzburg
	
	Details of the visit (Day 3) 
	Date: Sunday, 5 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Umkhumbaan Community Hall, Durban Central ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR LISA MANGCU For media enquiries or interviews with the Co-Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the National List