Parliament, Monday, 27 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture has congratulated the Proteas Women who came so close to winning an ICC official event, when they played Australia in Cape Town on Sunday.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Beauty Dlulane, said no one could miss the effort the ladies put through. She said with finals results could go any direction and the committee congratulated Australia for the win and professionalism they demonstrated all round.
	
	“This group of professional athletes sacrificed so much for the country. We are proud of what they achieved individually and collectively. They are the winners which is what we should remember them for.”
	
	“To have come this close to being crowned world champ is something that should live with us for a long time and that the team should plan from this achievement for future events,” added Ms Dlulane.
	
	A spirited South Africa went down to the leading side in women's cricket, Australia. Ms Dlulane said South Africa deserved a pat on the back for successfully hosting a women's event of this magnitude, and for remaining in the competition until the last over.
	
	“The committee is super proud of the economic value of the spectacle brought and the entertainment generated for the spectators. The marketing the country generated from the event can never be told in words.”
	
	Ms Dlulane urged CricketSA to build on this success and said the Newlands result should never be a source of despair for the team as playing Australia, in a final, was historical.
	
	Australia won the final by 20 runs.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MS BEAUTY DLULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress