Parliament, Saturday, 18 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport was urged by residents of the greater Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan area to ensure the speedy implementation of the Railway Safety Bill as it has a potential to unlock economic spin-offs for the region and the country in general.
	
	The committee has concluded the first of three public hearings in Gqeberha yesterday in the Eastern Cape with the Bill receiving an overwhelming support from the residents. The majority of participants highlighted that the high cost of travelling has a negative impact on the financial well-being of many poor households, the low safety standards, and unreliability of the railway services, left many people unable to choose their preferred mode of transport.
	
	The participants told the committee that safer railway services will result in many people returning to trains, and that according to them, will save a majority of poor people from the burden of daily heavy and unaffordable transport cost. They argued that safer railway system will have a positive economic effect on many fronts and will reduce the maintenance cost of the road infrastructure which is damaged on a daily basis by cargo trucks.
	
	Furthermore, participants said railway services will save companies a lot of money by transportation of goods by rail. They also argued that heavy duty traffic congestion will be alleviated on the roads and the rate of accidents will, inevitably, be lessened as more people will utilise the railway system than roads. Participants called for the implementation of the Bill to be fast-tracked and be carried within clear timelines.
	
	Meanwhile, there was a general support of Chapter 6 of the Bill that deals with enforcement through Railway safety inspectors who will ensure adherence to safety standards. Despite this, there was a call to remove clause 44 (6) which sets out the times when an inspector can execute a warrant to enter and inspect any premises. Participants based their argument on the assumption that safety standards might be undermined outside the hours stipulated in the Bill. They called for the Bill to empower railway safety inspectors to do their work around the clock.
	
	Participants also called for close collaboration between railway inspectors and the South African Police service to ensure safety of commuters and rail infrastructure. Many participants bemoaned the escalating vandalism and theft of rail infrastructure that destroys the railway system, and based on that, a call was made by participants for the reestablishment of the railway police which, according to them, maintained highest levels of safety in the trains and at train stations.
	
	Although the public hearings were on the Bill, there were participants, however, who raised challenges that were outside the Bill they said they face on a daily basis in the trains, and some of them called for the reversal of the decision to ban traders from operating in the trains. They argued that such a decision is an antithesis of the creation of economic opportunities and the fight against the rising unemployment in South Africa.
	
	The committee appreciated the qualitative inputs made by participants and assured them that their inputs will be considered when it deliberates on the Bill. “This process presents us with an opportunity to hear first-hand how these laws might affect you. The contributions that were made here in Gqberha will empower us to make informed decisions and ensure that the Bill caters for the demands of the public,” said Mr Lisa Mangcu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee will proceed today with the second leg of public consultations on the Bill in Adelaide in the Amathole District Municipality. The committee invites individuals and organisations within the area to contribute in the law-making process by attending the hearings. The committee will visit three districts in the province. Details of the visit (Day 2) 
	Date: Saturday, 18 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Adelaide Town Hall ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR LISA MANGCU  For media enquiries or interviews with the Co-Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr) Parliamentary Communication Services Tel: 021 403 8438 Cell: 081 512 7920 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal