The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) yesterday met with the Presidency in order to receive an update on the status of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) reports that are processed as per the Presidential Proclamations. SCOPA has previously held three meetings with the Presidency on SIU investigations. Minister in the Presidency Mr Mondli Gungubele said the Presidency’s report is on the progress it has made in ensuring SIU findings are implemented. “The challenge was on the role the Presidency is playing in ensuring the SIU findings are implemented. We were activated by this committee and we have been doing that work,” he said. The Deputy Director-General in the Presidency, Ms Matsietsi Mekoe, said the Presidency’s first appearance before SCOPA was triggered by proclamation R23 of 2020, which related to personal protective equipment (PPE). “However, we did indicate that we will not only be focusing on that proclamation or investigations relating to the PPE, because we were not oblivious to the fact that there’s a legacy or historic reports that are still outstanding.” The SIU has issued 162 reports to the President since 2001. Of these, 132 are final reports and 28 are interim reports. There are 387 referrals for restricting suppliers. However, no recommendations for blacklisting suppliers have been made to National Treasury by the affected accounting officers since the previous report to SCOPA in 2022. Ms Mekoe said the Presidency has shared the referrals for disciplinary action and proposed remedial actions with the Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA). Mr Jonathan Timm, the Director in the Presidency, told SCOPA that the Presidency is currently busy with a project that aims to deliver a coordinating and monitoring mechanism, which is envisaged as a system of systems. “The project to establish the SIU Referrals Coordination and Monitoring Mechanism (CMM) is now in its second phase.” “We are looking at working with the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), DPCI, National Treasury, DPSA, COGTA as well as the SIU. It is a distributed system that will not attempt to centralise data, but will attempt to coordinate and synthesise where appropriate,” he said. SCOPA has asked Minister Gungubele to submit monthly progress reports in writing to the committee on the issues related to all the SIU proclamations. The Chairperson of SCOPA, Mr Mkhuleko Hlengwa said: “There will also be quarterly appearances before the committee for us to have an interaction and an engagement on these matters.” Faith Ndenze
	22 February 2023 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal