President Ramaphosa reminded Members of Parliament during the joint sitting for the State of the Nation Address last night that South Africa’s rail network has suffered from many years of underinvestment, lack of maintenance, criminal activity and inefficiency. However, the government’s National Rail Policy sets out a guide to address this. Government adopted the policy last year to modernise and reform the rail sector, providing for, among other things, third-party access to the rail network. “We are working across government to develop a Transnet roadmap that will translate our policy commitments into reality, including the restructuring of Transnet freight rail to create a separate infrastructure manager for the rail network by October 2023,” the President promised. Transnet and private sector companies will conclude partnerships at the Durban and Ngqura container terminals, to enable new investment in our ports and improve their efficiency. This will help South Africa’s ports regain their global position as among the most efficient in the world. President Ramaphosa gave an example of the Port Elizabeth Automotive Terminal, which has been repositioned with more than double its previous capacity, increasing exports exponentially. Many more vehicles destined for overseas markets are now departing from this terminal. Transnet is also rehabilitating its idle locomotives and expanding its fleet. The President then turned his attention to the challenges South African commuters face every day with the passenger rail network. He mentioned that after the restructuring underway in the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa, 13 commuter rail lines have been reopened, significantly reducing the cost of travel for many workers. Citing developments in the area of roads, President Ramaphosa informed the joint siting of Parliament that in a major development, the South African National Roads Agency has awarded road construction contracts worth R18 billion over the last three months. The construction of the Msikaba and Mtentu bridges will soon be finished, making travel in the Eastern Cape much easier. This investment will also benefit the construction industry, the President noted, enabling large-scale job creation, skills development and poverty relief, especially in nearby rural communities. “Last year, we said we would increase the construction of rural bridges as part of the Welisizwe programme, to enable residents to easily and safely reach schools, workplaces and amenities,” the President reminded his listeners. He also informed Members of Parliament that 24 bridges in KwaZulu-Natal are currently under construction and site preparations are being made for a further 24 in the years to come. By Mava Lukani 10 February 2023 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. Democratic Alliance