Parliament, Thursday, 16 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport will this weekend hold public hearings on the Railway Safety Bill [B 7-2021] in the Eastern Cape. The hearings form part of a nationwide public participation process that aims to entrench community participation in the law-making process to ensure that legislation passed by Parliament takes into consideration the lived experiences of the people.
	
	This process is a constitutional requirement that Parliament is obliged to undertake as part of its decision-making processes. “These hearings are in line with Section 59 (1) of the Constitution, which urges public involvement in the legislative-making process of the Assembly. Also, we are hopeful that as the primary beneficiaries of the protections proposed by the Bill, participants will present qualitative inputs aimed at improving the Bill ensuring safe railway operations,” said Mr Lisa Mangcu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The Bill aims to amend the National Railway Safety Regulator Act 16 of 2002 by facilitating an improvement in general safety within the railway environment, and ensure that rail becomes an attractive mode of transport and contributes towards economic growth, which is a platform to effectively fight inequality, poverty and unemployment.
	
	In the effort to align legislation with the White Paper on National Rail Policy and government’s plan to move passengers and freight from road to rail, the Bill proposes and promotes the use of rail as an efficient mode of transport. Also, the Bill aims to facilitate a modern, flexible and efficient regulatory regime that ensures the continuing enhancement of safe railway operations across the country.
	
	The committee last week held hearings in KwaZulu-Natal, where residents called for the limitation of the Minister’s power and authority in the appointment process of the Railway Safety Regulator Board as a way of preventing possible nepotism and corruption. Other participants urged the committee to include within the Bill measures to prevent possible corruption by railway safety inspectors who will play a critical role in ensuring a safe railway system. There was a general agreement that means to improve safety standards within the railway environment will insulate the poor from the high travel cost as they will utilise rail services.
	
	The committee invites residents of the Eastern Cape to contribute in the law-making process by attending the hearings. The committee will visit three districts in the province. Details of the visit (Day 1) 
	Date: Friday, 17 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Centenary Hall (Nangoza Jebe Hall) New Brighton
	
	Details of the visit (Day 2) 
	Date: Saturday, 18 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Adelaide
	
	Details of the visit (Day 3) 
	Date: Sunday, 19 February 2023
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: East London City Hall ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR LISA MANGCU For media enquiries or interviews with the Co-Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape