Parliament, Friday, 03 February 2023 – The Presiding Officers, led by National Assembly Speaker Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula and National Council of Provinces Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo, will on Monday 06 February at 11:00 hold a hybrid media briefing on preparations to host the 2023 State of the Nation Address. The 2023 State of the Nation Address, where President Cyril Ramaphosa will outline government’s plans to provide services to the people of South Africa, has been called for Thursday, 09 February at 19:00 at the Cape Town City Hall. The Presiding Officers will use this briefing to outline progress on the preparations so far and explain how the event programme will unfold. The Presiding Officers will also use the briefing as a photo opportunity for media to witness the swearing in of new Members of Parliament to fill in vacancies caused by recent resignations. DETAILS OF THE MEDIA BRIEFING AND SWEARING-IN: DATE: Monday, 06 February 2023
	TIME: 11:00
	VENUE: Imbizo Centre, 120 Plein Street Building, Parliament and Virtual Platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the Media Briefing should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Nolizwi Magwagwa at: nmagwagwa@parliament.gov.za before 12 noon on Sunday, 05 February. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament's YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notifications of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress