Parliament, Wednesday, 15 February 2023 – President Cyril Ramaphosa, in his State of the Nation Address on 9 February, announced government plans to address South Africa’s energy crisis and prevailing socio-economic challenges. As such, on Wednesday, 22 February, the Minister of Finance, Mr Enoch Godongwana, will provide details of spending and revenue collection proposals to implement these plans. Minister Godongwana will deliver the 2023 Budget Speech to the National Assembly in the Cape Town City Hall at 14.00.
	
	The Minister will also introduce the Appropriation Bill and table the Division of Revenue Bill to Parliament on the day.
	
	Members of the Media, including photographers, who wish to be in the Cape Town City Hall to cover the Budget Speech are requested to forward their details to Mlindi Mpindi (mmpindi@parliament.gov.za), by 17.00 on 17 February 2023. Details are required as follows: Full name, name of the media house, cell phone number and ID number or passport number). 
	
	DETAILS OF THE BUDGET SPEECH TO PARLIAMENT
	
	DATE: WEDNESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2023
	TIME: 14:00
	VENUE: CAPE TOWN CITY HALL
	
	Minister Godongwana’s 2023 Budget Speech will be broadcast live on Parliament’s DSTV Channel 408, live streamed on Parliament’s website and Parliament social media platforms, including Parliament’s YouTube Channel. Parliament will also provide live feed to broadcasters.
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Members of the public can follow parliamentary sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), through a live stream on Parliament’s website, Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page, on the links below:
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	NB: Members of the Media who wish to be part of the National Treasury’s Lock up must contact Xolisa Dodo by email: Xolisa.Dodo@treasury.gov.za
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. Democratic Alliance on the National List