Parliament, Monday 20 February 2023 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport has concluded three public hearings on the Railway Safety Bill in the Eastern Cape where residents have decried the state of railway services in the country. The committee held its last leg of public participation process yesterday in the province in East London.
	
	Participants said while the intentions of the Bill are admirable, they remained unsure about where the Bill will be implemented. Some of them suggested that there is a need to focus on the revitalisation of the railway services first, to ensure the effectiveness of the Bill. This suggestion was premised on the assertion that the current state of railway services is unsatisfactory and could render the Bill useless.
	
	There was a general agreement among the participants that the policy decision to shift the transportation of goods from roads to rail, and the enhancement of rail safety to encourage people to choose rail as the preferred mode of transport is correct, but they argued that more needed to be done to revitalise rail infrastructure and to invest in it to effectively implement the decision.
	
	To achieve this, the participants called for the reestablishment of railway police unit to prevent the current rampant theft and vandalism of infrastructure. Also, participants in East London and in all the public hearings on the Bill that took place in the Eastern Cape, emphasised the need for the collaboration between railway authorities and the South African Police Service for more and sustainable police visibility at railway premises to deter acts of vandalism and theft.
	
	Participants also suggested that the Railway Safety Bill must include a clause that limits the power and authority of the Minister to appoint board members of the Railway Safety Regulator as that is spelt out in Section 11 of the Bill. This suggestion was made as a result of fears of dysfunctionality of the board because of nepotism and other nefarious ways of the appointment of candidates as that happened in many state owned entities previously.
	
	Notwithstanding the fact that the hearings were on the Bill, some participants raised concerns about the daily challenges they faced when using the railway system. Many participants called for the reversal of the decision to ban trading in trains especially considering the high unemployment rate in the country. Participants called for a regime to regularise traders and enable them to conduct business in these trains.
	
	The residents of the Eastern Cape generally agreed that the revitalisation of railway services has a potential to unlock economic opportunities and contribute directly to efforts of pushing back the frontiers of poverty and unemployment. The committee will on the first week of March move to Northern Cape to conduct similar public hearings.
	
	“We are satisfied with the level of inputs we have received in the Eastern Cape and the inputs received will be considered by the committee. The conclusion of these hearings represent the committee’s commitment to the obligation of public consultation as it is enshrined in the Constitution. Also it validates the decision made by drafters of the Constitution to ensure public contribution to law-making,” said Mr Lisa Mangcu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MR LISA MANGCU For media enquiries or interviews with the Co-Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal