Parliament, Sunday, 19 February 2023 – A majority of residents of Limpopo who attended the parliamentary public hearings on the Climate Change Bill that were conducted by the Portfolio Committee on Forestry, Fisheries and Environment in the Vhembe District Municipality yesterday, have expressed their support for the draft legislation. The residents supported the Bill and spoke about the importance of conserving the planet by taking care of the environment and reducing carbon emissions, stop cutting down trees and throwing waste into rivers and open spaces. The residents said the tendency of dumping of disposable nappies in streams and rivers is one of their main challenges and they hope that the Bill will help introduce systems that will remove this and other deeply entrenched tendencies. There was also a proposal to reintroduce community police which will be managed by traditional leaders to enforce environmental laws especially in rural areas where municipal waste management systems are not working. The Bill seeks to ensure the effective management of inevitable climate change impacts by enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change, with a view to building social, economic and environmental resilience and adequate national adaptation response in the context of the global climate change response. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Pogiso Modise, commented on the issue of disposable nappies highlighting that it was a very serious matter that needs collective efforts from both communities and other role-players. “Who throws this dirt in our rivers – if we know the answer we can work together to prevent anything that pollute our rivers and save our environment,” he said. Today the committee will hold public hearings in Bela-Bela, in Limpopo’s Waterberg District Municipality. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY, FISHERIES AND ENVIRONMENT, MR POGISO MODISE. For media enquiries or interviews with the committee Chairperson, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena (Mr) Cell: 081 705 2130 Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress